---
layout:     post
title:      "Book Report: Grit"
date:       "2019-02-26 10:18:00"
author:     "bobby"
comments:   true
---

# Introduction

Growing up in an Asian household, I was constantly compared to other kids. In the stereotypical way of Asian upbringing, my parents always made me feel like I was never good enough, so I always wondered was there a single solution that would give me the edge of how to become more successful than these other kids. “How could I be smarter? More talented?” were always my initial thoughts. But in hindsight, was I even asking the right questions? Did “being smarter” or “more talented” necessarily mean I would be more successful in life?

I came across “Grit” by Angela Duckworth when the co-founders of my company gave a talk that was inspired by the concept of “Grit.” Their presentation was about how they were able to build a relatively lean startup even faced many obstacles and that “grit” is what got them through the tough times. After walking out of their presentation, I thought “Maybe I should read the book that my co-founders attribute to the success of their company huh? Might get some brownie points.” (turns out they didn't read the book)  I ordered the book on Amazon and dived right in.  My initial impressions were of slight disappointment; being a professor from UPENN, shouldn't this book contain some more scientific evidence that support her claims of grit? The majority of the content consists of anecdotes and stories from people who are already considered talented or at the top of their field. A methodology or system of how to become “grittier” was no where to be found nor were there examples of her own experiments that proved people with more grit were more successful in their endeavors. But as I continued reading, I realized that she probably didn't want to bombard her intended audience with a bunch of boring of scientific data. Instead, her book was intended to motivate her readers by introducing them to a high level concept of grit and providing the notion that a *combination of passion and perseverance is more important than talent* when it comes to achievement. I could empathize with this strategy to inspire her readers because if I could go back and give my 10 year old self advice of how to be successful, it would definitely be all psychological components of grit: have interest in one thing, put a lot of practice and effort in that one thing, figure out how I can take this interest to help others, and finally hope that all my efforts today will make me better prepared for tomorrow. I wouldn't tell my 10 year old self, “Hey Young Bob, these scientific papers contain all the experiments and data that say that grittier people are more successful. Read them.” Young Bob with his (undiagnosed) ADD would instantly toss those papers in the trash and continue to play his video games.

# What is GRIT?

But the content of this book isn't just for young students. I still meet people all the time who believe that they can't achieve whatever it is that they want because they think they are somehow not “talented” or “smart” enough. If only everyone was introduced to the basics of grit: Just showing up, put in effort, and not get distracted by the talent. In the second chapter of her book, Duckworth states that even she was “distracted by talent” while teaching math to her students. She observed that there were definitely students who were initially more talented in math and assumed they would progress faster at the subject, but to her surprise it was the students who had a stronger work ethic that would do better on tests. “Aptitude did not guarantee achievement. Talent for math was different from excelling in math.” In the beginning of the third chapter, she recites a quote by the philosopher Nietzsche, who said “Our vanity, our self love, promotes the cult of the genius...for if we think of genius as something magical, we are not obliged to compare ourselves and find ourselves lacking...to call someone 'divine' means: 'here there is no need to compete.'”. In other words, mythologizing natural talent lets us all off the hook.  If you think someone is “naturally” more talented and smart, you can “excuse” yourself from putting in the effort and work that would be required to get to that level of talent. 

# A Gritty Equation

In fact, Duckworth attributes her theory of achievement to a simple equation that involves effort on both sides: Talent combined with effort creates skill, and with that skill plus more effort creates achievement. “Talent, how fast we absolutely improve in skill - absolutely matters. But effort factors into the calculations twice, not once. Effort builds skill. At the very same time, effort makes skill productive (achievement).” Even though Duckworth states talent matters, she never states how much the level of talent matters, but instead emphasizes that effort - something you are in control of - matters a whole lot more.

# Analysis (Pros and Cons)

There are many things I liked about the book that I didn't get to cover including “parenting” for grit and building a (company) culture of grit, but the main take away for me is that a combination of passion and perseverance, the core components of grit, are more of important than talent. Passion is found through interest and purpose. If you can cultivate interest and find a higher purpose in that interest, you can genuinely grow that passion. From there, you combine that passion with perseverance, which includes putting in a lot of work and deliberate effort to practice that interest and getting back up anytime you are met with setbacks. I feel that the idea of getting back up after every set back is a very important message from the author. Duckworth believes that the habit of committing to whatever you have started working on is a very important aspect of grit. One cannot switch interests (career paths, projects etc.) simply because things are getting tough. It is important to commit to sticking with and finishing whatever it is that you set out to do in order develop a better habit of grit.

# Conclusion

I would definitely recommend this book to anyone who would like a high-level primer on the studies of achievement. While you won't get methodologies or data on how to become more gritty, it will start you off on the right path and even provides annotations and recommended reading in the end. But more importantly, the book will definitely give you an idea of how to become more “gritty.”  
