---
layout:     post
title:      "Book Report: Essentialism"
date:       "2019-02-27 10:43:00"
author:     "bearcat"
comments:   true
---

# Introduction

We now live in a time where we can literally choose almost any career, buy almost anything off the internet, hear just about everyone's opinion, and view all the fun and adventures everyone else enjoying. But with that comes a cost: having the pressures of choosing the “right” career for yourself (Be a doctor or an actor?), having to decide whether you should buy yet another electronic on sale on Amazon, having to read Facebook posts of your liberal cousin defending his political beliefs against with his Trump-supporting conservative dad (actually happening to me), and literally watching everyone travel the world on Instagram while feeling a sense of FOMO. With so many options available, so much pressure from many different opinions, and the idea that I can have it all, how do I choose what is “essential” for myself? The solution, according to Greg McKeown, is Essentialism,  *a “disciplined, systematic approach for determining where your highest point of contribution lies, and then making execution of those things almost effortlessly. *After perusing through 20+ chapters of Essentialism, not only did I find a book that teaches you how to gracefully tell people “no” but also learned about a framework that teaches you how to make the highest contribution to what is most important in one's life.

# Tradeoffs

The first section is titled “Essence,” which describes the core mindset of the Essentialist:  that we “choose to” [do things], “only a few things really matter”, and that we “can do anything but not everything.” The chapter titled, “Trade Offs,” is probably the chapter that resonated with me the most out of any other. It focuses on the concept of “trade-offs” and how we encounter them everyday in both our personal and professional lives. The chapter makes a huge distinction between on how an essentialist would approach a trade-off compared to the their non-essential counterparts. The non-essentialist approaches every trade off with “How can I do both?” or “How can I do it all? whereas an essentialist asks “What is the trade off that I want to make?” The essentialist is aware that there are two objective finite resources in this world: their time and energy. Splitting either one into various directions (and options) means that they don't give all to any one direction. Mathematically speaking, you cannot split your time and energy between two things and expect the same results that you would if you focused them on one. What you must do instead is recognize which priority are you interested in putting your highest contribution to and deliberately make a trade-off between those options. By forcing ourselves to weigh our options, we create the opportunity of achieving the outcome we actually want which is in contrast to forcing ourselves to sacrifice on margins that we might not have made by design. One of the more profound quotes I read in this chapter was “There are no solutions, only trade-offs.” It makes you really think about every problem you are dealing with, anything from daily decisions like what to eat to engineering advanced software. 

# How to say 'No'

 Following this section is the theme of “Explore,” which has some interesting concepts including the importance of “Play” in your daily life and how “Sleep” is necessary for operating at high levels of contribution. Next is the theme “Eliminate,” which includes the chapter that is featured in Tim Ferris' podcast (and the reason that I bought this book), titled “Dare: The Power of a Graceful 'No.'” I feel that I often have a hard time saying “No” and this chapter addresses reasons why we would: for loss of business opportunities, to avoid social awkward moments, and fear of missing out (a.k.a “FOMO). Even the author acknowledges that navigating these moments with courage and grace is an important skill to master. He makes a great point when he says that you have to make peace with the fact that saying no requires the trade-off between popularity and respect. When one says no, there is usually a short-term impact on the relationship. The person may be disappointed or even angry, but eventually they will learn to respect you. Essentialists accept they cannot be popular with everyone all the time. I like that idea because it is implied that if you choose to say “No” to certain events like social gatherings etc., you deliberately choose to instead use that time for what is important: time on your personal projects, time with family, or even just “me” time for oneself. Once again, this goes back to the concept of “trade-offs.” Personally, I really like to spend time with friends and attend social events, but as I grow older, I realize that my time is more limited and that time needs to be spent on things like practicing my craft and more time with my loved ones so having a framework for navigating when to accept or decline an invitation is vital to those goals.

# The goal: Living with meaning and purpose

The last part of the book is dedicated to making execution on the “vital few” feel effortless. The chapter topics range from creating better habits, to entering the “flow” state and focus, to wrapping it all up. Because I have been interested in most of these topics and have read books that are fully dedicated them, this last section served as a summary of those topics. But I did like how the author concluded the book by saying that the way of the Essentialist isn't just about achieving success, it is about living a life of meaning and purpose. What you should gain in the end of after becoming an Essentialist is having more clarity in what really matters, more control and more joy in your life.

# Analysis

Overall, I think many different types of people can benefit from reading this book as it is a good introduction to a variety of systems and techniques for self-improvement. It has tips on everything from time-management strategy, building better habits, making better decisions, developing better focus, and even how to improve work performance. You can use this book as a starting point for your own research to self-improvement or exploration to a topic that you may find interesting. I also think this book was written for entrepreneurs or working professionals looking to improve their work performance.  For example, his tip on not taking any meetings that do not have an agenda or asking your superior “What should I deprioritize?” if you receive requests to do more work (definitely one that I will use myself). However, the same benefit of being introduced to many different topics also makes it hard to describe what this book really is. It's not a book on how to have better habits, or better manage your time and people, or a guide on how to politely say “no,” or book on how to improve yourself, but a little bit of all of the above. Whether that is a good or bad thing is I think up to the reader. I did feel that there  were sections of the book felt a bit incohesive. One of the ironic things about this book is that it contained 20 different chapters that is supposed to represent the philosophy of “Essentialism.” Yet, I didn't feel that all 20 chapters were necessary. I sometimes even questioned whether certain chapters (“Sleep”, “Play”, “Buffer) were arbitrarily included. For example, the chapter on “sleep” was in the section of exploring, but I didn't feel that it was necessary to dedicate a whole chapter on sleep and it didn't provide support for the concept of exploring your options.

# Conclusion

I have noticed that there is a counter-culture on the rise to save us from the notion of “too much.” From Marie Kondo's method of “tidying up” for people who have too much material stuff to Andy Puddicombe's “Headspace” app for people who have too much on their mind, we now have Greg McKeown's Essentialism, a discipline for people who have too many choices and too much social pressure. While it is not the perfect guide to the pursuit of less, it does provide a lot of tools that one can use to in their daily life to making the highest contribution to what is most important to them.

