---
layout:     post
title:      "Book Report: Deep Work"
date:       "2019-02-25 10:41:00"
author:     "bobby"
comments:   true
---

# Intro

Throughout my life, I have always struggled to concentrate on any activity that required me to push my cognitive capacity to its limits.  The struggle would magnify during my finals week during my time at university. I would go to the library, open up all my books and have all my notes ready to study, but I would first check Facebook before I would begin studying. Even after making a conscious decision to get off social media, I would check ESPN on my phone or look at reddit maybe every 10 - 15 minutes, even if it was for 10 seconds. I didn't realize it back then but my methods of studying were very fragmented and long periods of “deep” concentration only happened when I played video games. Fast forward 10 years, I finally decide to do some research of how I could pick up topics faster and come across a book called “Deep Work” by Cal Newport. The book focuses on the subject of “Deep Work,” what Newport describes as “professional activities performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities to their limit.” He spends the first half of the book talking about how the ability to perform deep work is becoming more valuable while simultaneously becoming more rare and meaningful. The second half of the book provides a set of rules that one can follow in order to achieve deep work. After reading the book, it really changed the way I used my time and gave me a framework for getting into a mindset where I could concentrate intensely for long periods of time. 

# So what is Deep Work? 

Deep Work is a strategy for working that helps you learn faster and helps you improve on perfoming at an elite level. It is essentially the ability to perform intense, distraction-free concentration on some activity. That's it. Newport mentions that many historical figures who have had immense influences and contributions to their fields all have had to consistently perform deep work in order to achieve success. For example, he talks about Carl Jung, a famous psychologist and one of the most influential thinkers of the twentieth century, who had strict rituals for deep work and even went out of his way to build a second home so he could isolate himself to conduct his work with the assurance of zero distractions. However, Newport's main concern is that deep work is getting harder to achieve while becoming increasingly valuable. He lists several examples of each concern, but I'll share what are the most important takeaways for myself: 

First, the rise of digital technology is transforming our labor markets in unexpected ways and these technologies are racing ahead but the skill sets of the general population and many organizations are lagging behind. For example, many jobs are now being automated by machines. If they are not automated by machines, then they are likely outsourced to other countries with cheaper labor markets that can perform the same type of skills. In order to become equipped with the right skillsets and tools in our modern economy, we must possess two abilities:

> 1. The ability to quickly master hard things.
> 2. The ability to produce at an elite level, in terms of quality and speed. 

Those who will can master hard things and acquire skill sets where they can provide valuable output for companies and businesses will be themselves become valuable. But in order to be able to master hard things and perform at a high level, one must be able to work “deeply.” Mastery and performing at a high level takes a lot time, concentration and work. The same goes for producing at an elite level: someone who is able to work for long periods of time without distraction will more likely output more valuable work. It's simple math: Those who spend more time working without being distracted put in more minutes on the task at hand, and therefore has more of the potential to do “elite level” work. But what is the secret to acquiring these two abilities? You guessed it; your ability to master hard things and perform at an elite level all depends on your ability to perform deep work.

# But how does one do deep work? 

Newport describes 4 rules that one should follow to be develop a habit of Deep Work. I won't go into all of them, but just the few that that I took away and applied to my own work habits. 

The first rule is simple: Work Deeply. The key to developing a deep work habit is to add routines and rituals to your working life that are designed to minimize the amount of willpower and decisions you have to make in order to transition into a state of unbroken concentration. From here, Newport describes six different strategies one can choose from, but I chose to adopt the most flexible sounding strategy because I felt it is what works for me: The Rhythmic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling. Essentially, the easiest way to start deep work sessions is to transform them to a simple regular habit. You generate a rhythm for work that removes the willpower and energy to deciding if and when you're going to go deep. Once you are done for the day, you mark on your calendar a big red X, which signals the completion of a period of deep work. As you continue to become consistent overtime with your deep work sessions, you will see eventually see a “chain” of red X's. This method is also popularly known as the “chain method”, [a method that was popularly used by comedian Jerry Seinfeld](https://lifehacker.com/jerry-seinfelds-productivity-secret-281626). The chain method is a good example of a “rhythmic philosophy” because it combines a simple heuristic (doing the same thing work every day) with an easy way to remind yourself: a big red X on the calendar. Having a visual aid can both motivate you to continue to do work everyday and eliminate any other “scheduling” decisions because you don't want to “break your chain” of Xs.

The second and third rules are “Embracing Boredom” and “Quitting Social Media” respectively, which I will not go into. Although there were definitely some useful tips, I felt that those principles were more or less common sense types of advice. The last rule, “drain the shallows,” really forced me to examine how much “deep work” I perform in contrast to how much “shallow work” that takes up my day. I always aim to get at least 4 concentrated, zero-distracted work hours a day, but sometimes it can be a struggle because of all the meetings and miscellaneous distractionsI encounter. 

The ability to prevent trivial, shallow work from creeping into your life depends how your manage your time. Newport suggests to go as far as scheduling every minute of your (work) day and assign blocks for “deep work” hours. The entire day should be made up of “blocks” of time that is specifically dedicated to a single task, whether it be taking a lunch break or working on doing actual work. These blocks will then guide your entire work day and all you have to do is reference these time blocks so you don't have to mentally litigate what you can and cannot do nor worry about whether you have done enough for the day. This structure will prevent your time from engaging in “shallow work” and will give the opportunity for more depth. But most importantly, this strategy is for one to recognize that a deep work habit requires you to treat your time with respect. You don't haphazardly open up your email, check Facebook, or start instant messaging your buddies online. No, it is for people who are serious about their work and who want to get that work done.

# Conclusion

The greatest take away from this book is the idea that activities, regardless of their importance, consume the same limited store of time and attention. Therefore how you choose to spend your time will determine the quality of your life. If you spend your time working on things that matter to you, you ideally will continue to improve on whatever it is that you care about. With more time and practice, your skills become better and more valuable. Once they become valuable, you start to care about the quality of your craft, so you begin on a path of mastery to your craft. 

Deep Work has really motivated me to sit down and really think about where my time goes and how I can make sure it goes to “high-impacting” activities. Whether those activities are spent with friends and family or spent on improving my skills and craft, how I use my time is more scrutinized. Overall, I recommend this book for anyone who feels that they don't get enough “deep work” hours done in a day and are looking for a solution to this problem. It most likely won't solve all your problems, but it will definitely help you get started on the right path. 
