---
layout:     post
title:      "Book Report: Atomic Habits"
date:       "2019-03-30 11:26:00"
author:     "bearcat"
---

Atomic Habits by James Clear is about how habits work and how to improve your good habits and/or eliminate your bad ones. The author begins by highlighting how one can change their behaviors by consistently making small improvements everyday. The term “atomic habit” refers to a habit that is at its “smallest” (and implicitly easiest) form. For example, when starting a habit of going to the gym to work out, the “smallest” form of the habit is not the act of working out, but simply entering the front door of the gym. Whatever happens after entering the gym is up to you. Once going to gym on a daily basis becomes a habit, you enter the next phase, which could be forming a habit of walking on the treadmill, picking up a weight, or doing some push-ups. The purpose of doing “atomic habits” is so that one can aim for marginal gains; the author even goes to suggest consistently aiming for 1 percent improvement. The sum of daily 1 percent improvement compounds and eventually your efforts turn into the results you are looking for. Atomic habits are also the building blocks of the overall systems that govern your behavior. The author suggests that if you have trouble changing your habits, it is because you don't have the proper system in place for changing those habits. Change in any behavior involves 3 components:

1. Changing your outcome (this is usually the end goal that one has when they start out a habit)
2. Changing your process (the actual behavior that you do)
3. Changing your identity (identity involves your beliefs and worldview)

The system in this case refers to your identity. When setting out for behavior change, most people focus on the outcome or the end goal. Then they establish a process to achieve those outcomes. At first, doing the process is easy with initial motivation coming fromthe goal in mind. But when things get hard, it is easy to lose that motivation. For example, if you were a smoker and trying to quit smoking, the goal would be to quit smoking and the process you implement would simply be to not smoke. But then you are invited out with friends and have drinks and now all of them are having a cigarette and then you make an exception “this time” to have a single cigarette. Well, you've already failed your goal. But now imagine if you changed your identity to say that you are not a smoker instead of just telling people you are quitting. Anytime the opportunity for a smoke arises, you simply remind yourself that you are not a smoker instead of “trying to quit.”  Your identity, self-image, and pride are now involved with that behavior and instantly re-frames your belief about yourself. It is way more powerful to focus on who we wish to become instead of what we want to achieve. The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the more motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it.

The author also breaks down the anatomy of a habit and provides a corresponding “law of behavior change” to each step. Every habit is composed of a cue, craving, response, and reward. The cue is the stimulus, the initial “thing” that gets us to initiate the habit. The craving is an emotional response we have to the cue and can be different for people depending on the context. For example, the sight of the cigarette can lead to a craving for smokers, but do nothing for non-smokers. The response is the how we respond to the cue (usually with a certain behavior) and the reward is what we get for responding to the cue. The first law of behavior change (that also corresponds with the cue) is to make the habit “obvious.” You want to expose yourself to more cues in order to have a greater chance of doing the habit. An example would be to prepare your gym bag and have it in front of the door so that you are reminded to go to the gym. If you are trying to eliminate a habit, the author suggests that you design your environment in a way where you remove exposure to the cue. Instead of relying on self-control, you structure your life in a way that skips using willpower all together by eliminating the cue. The next law is to make the habit “attractive.” An interesting insight is that the anticipation of a reward, not the fulfillment of it, is what gets us to take action. The reason for this is due to a neurotransmitter in our brains called dopamine which gets released not only when we experience pleasure but also when we anticipate it. Whenever dopamine levels rise, so do our motivations to act. You can simulate a more attractive habit by a technique known as “temptation bundling,” which is associating a habit that you want do with a habit that you need to do. After making a habit attractive, you want to make it “easy.” This is probably the most important law of behavior phase. We can start off highly motivated to do something, but if the obstacles are too hard, it won't be sustainable and we won't repeat the habit. If you have a goal to run a marathon, you don't start your training by even doing half the marathon. You start by doing literally walking and then gradually increasing the distance as the length of time and distance gets easier on your body. When starting a new habit, start with the easiest part of the habit and keep repeating it until it becomes second nature. Another tip the author provides is the 2-minute rule, which is a rule that says any new habit should only take 2 minutes to do. The scale of the habit should be so small that it is easy enough to do it in 2 minutes or less. The idea is to make your habits as easy as possible to start and that new habits should not feel challenging. What follows after you have developed these initial habits can be challenging, but the first 2 minutes should always be easy. Instead of trying to develop the perfect habit from the start,  do the easy thing on a consistent basis. We rarely think of effective change this way because everyone is consumed by the end goal. But before your can optimize, you have to standardize. After that, you can shape and improve your habits in phases. For example, if you want to start exercising consistently, phase 1 would be changing into your work out clothes everyday. Then the next phase would be to actually go to the gym, then increasing your exercise time to 15 minutes once per week, and then finally exercising 3 times per week. The last law of behavior change is to make it “satisfying.” The first three laws try to get you to do a behavior, the last law is what helps you repeat it. We are more likely to repeat behaviors that are pleasurable. In fact, the author says that the cardinal rule of behavior change is what is immediately rewarded gets repeated. The best approach to making a habit satisfying is to use reinforcement, which refers to the process of using an immediate reward to increase your behavior.

Analysis:

I picked up this book because I came across James Clear's blog and subscribed to his articles, which were well written, open, and interesting. Because I read a few of his articles, I figured why not to his book, as it seemed like would just be one 
big organized collection of blog posts. It turned out to be a a well written book with good examples.

This book is for anyone that is looking to improve the habits in their lives. Habits govern your limits. Anyone who is looking to make improvements on those limits should read this book. It will teach them how to build better habits. It will give them the tools to determine why they would have succeeded or failed in building those habits. And most importantly, it will force you to think about the habits you currently have and be more aware of what those habits are and the driving factors of those habits. 

The pros of this book is that the author provides an easy framework to develop better habits and provides examples of how others have achieved or failed at doing so. The process is straight forward and is derived from actual behavior psychology (Pavlovian techniques). Another pro is that this book is easy to read and it doesn't require deep knowledge of behavioral psychology. Both scientific and real-world evidence is used to back his claims and techniques.

I definitely got what I wanted from the book as I am applying the techniques I learn from the book to my life. It was a great read and I liked it so much that I have read the book multiple times and listened to the e-book version on my car rides to work. 

Key Takeaways:


* Every habit starts a with a cue, develops a craving depending on context and emotions, initiates a response, and assesses a reward.
* There are 3 phases to behavior change: changing your outcome, changing your process, and changing your identity.
* Most people start with the end goal (outcome) but never focus on the identity.
* The two-step process toe behavior change is (1) Decide who you want to be and (2) prove it to yourself with small wins.
* The 4 laws of behavior change are make it obvious, make it attractive, make it easy, and make it satisfying. 
* Conversely, to eliminate a habit, you would do the opposite: make it invisible, make it unattractive, make it difficult, make it unsatisfying.
* When starting a habit, start as small as you can and then slowly but consistently improve everyday.
* Habits govern your limits in life.
* Your genes can predispose, but not predetermine. Your environment and the people who you associate with also greatly affect your habits.

